---
layout:     post
title:      "Java 14 Records"
subtitle:   "This is one of new feature introduced with JDK 14"
date:       2020-04-10 12:00:00
author:     "Vipin Sharma"
header-img: "img/posts/blog-post-bg2.jpeg"
comments: true
tags: [java, JDK14]
---


## Records
This feature is going to increase productivity for professional java developers. It simplifies coding, makes java code more concise and readable. Records provide a way to model data in java, example for data could be one row from database table.

<!-- ### Summary of Records
This is from [JEP-359](https://openjdk.java.net/jeps/359)
> Enhance the Java programming language with records. Records provide a compact syntax for declaring classes > which are transparent holders for shallowly immutable data. This is a preview language feature in Java 14.    

### Goal of records
This is again from [JEP-359](https://openjdk.java.net/jeps/359)
> While it is superficially tempting to treat records as primarily being about boilerplate reduction, we instead choose a more semantic goal: modeling data as data. (If the semantics are right, the boilerplate will take care of itself.) It should be easy, clear, and concise to declare shallowly-immutable, well-behaved nominal data aggregates.    
<br> -->


### Common implementation use cases
**1. Multiple return values:** Often we encounter cases when we want to return multiple values from method, for this we will have to create a class having values that we need to return. Record provides an easy way rather than writing boilerplate code.

**2. Data transfer objects (DTO):** Developers working with databases often write DTO which typically used for storage only, we can again reduce boilerplate code using java records.

<br>

### Java code example

To write even a simple data carrier class we have to write lot of boilerplate code. Like constructors, accessors, equals(), hashCode(), toString(), etc. Following is one example showing Point class.


```
class Point
{
 public final int x;   
 public final int y;    
 public Point(int x, int y) { this.x = x; this.y = y; }    
 public int getX() {...}   
 public int getY() {...}   
 public String toString() {...}   
 public boolean equals(Object o) {...}   
 public int hashCode() {...)  
}
```


**Record equivalent for Point class is following one line, WOW !**
```java
record Point(int x, int y){}
```
In above example you can see, record has a **name** and a **state description**. The state description declares the **components** of the record. Optionally, a record has a body.

This feature is in preview mode. To use preview feature we need to pass --enable-preview parameter. Sample command for RecordsJDK14.java is:

```shell
javac --enable-preview -source 14 com/vip/jdk14/JavaRecords.java
java --enable-preview com.vip.jdk14.JavaRecords
```

We can use javap command to see compiled class:

```shell
javac  --enable-preview -source 14 Point.java
javap -p Point.class

Compiled from "Point.java"
public final class com.vip.jdk14.Point extends java.lang.Record {
  private final int x;
  private final int y;
  public com.vip.jdk14.Point(int, int);
  public java.lang.String toString();
  public final int hashCode();
  public final boolean equals(java.lang.Object);
  public int x();
  public int y();
}
```

In output of above javap command we can see following are properties of Records, Records have:

1. A private final field for each component in record declaration(state description). (In above example private final int x, private final int y)
2. A public read accessor method for each component of Record, with the same name and type as the parameter. (public int x(), public int y())
3. A public constructor, having same arguments as the components of record, which initializes each field from the corresponding argument. (public com.vip.jdk14.Point(int, int))
4. Implementations of equals and hashCode that say two records are equal if they are of the same type and contain the same state.
5. An implementation of toString that includes the string representation of all the record components, with their names.

Records behave like normal classes except restrictions, following are few properties of the Records:
1.	They can be declared top level or nested, they can be generic.
2.	They can implement interfaces.
3.	They are instantiated via the new keyword.
4.	The record's body may declare static methods, static fields, static initializers, constructors, instance methods, and nested types.
5.	The record, and the individual components in a state description, may be annotated.
6.	We can define a nested record, which is implicitly static; this avoids an immediately enclosing instance which would silently add state to the record.

Records have 3 type of constructors we can define explicitly:
1.  **Canonical constructor**: It contains all components of record.
2.  **Compact constructor**:  It doesn't have any parameter, it is always called when defined.
3.  **Custom constructor**: All others except above 2.

Following is example for all 3 types of constructors we talked about.

```java
record NameValue(String name, int value) {
    //canonical constructor (It contains all components of record)
    public NameValue(String name, int value) {
        this.name = name;
        this.value = value;
    }  
    //compact constructor, no parameter, always called when defined.
    public NameValue {
        if(value == 1) throw new RuntimeException(""); //throwing Exception whenever value is 1, this is to test if it is called always.
    }
    // Custom constructor
    public NameValue(int value) {
        this(null, value); // Necessary to avoid compilation error
        if(value == 2) throw new RuntimeException(""); // Throwing Exception to test when is this called.
    }
}
```

<br>
### Restrictions  
 Following code throws compilation error in extends, because Records are implicitly final.
```
java record Base(int a) { } record Child(int a, int b) extends Base { }
```    
Similarly we have few more restrictions to follow for Records.

 Restrictions on records can be divided in 3 categories:
1. Restrictions that ensure the state description alone defines the representation
   1. Records cannot extend any other class
   2. Records cannot declare instance fields other than the private final fields which correspond to components
    of the state description. Any other fields which are declared must be static.
2. Restrictions that emphasize the API of a record is defined solely by its state description,
and cannot be enhanced later by another class or record.
   1. Records are implicitly final.
   2. Records cannot be abstract.
3. This restriction embodies an immutable by default policy.
   1. The components of a record are implicitly final.



<br>
### Why Record why not just tuples?    
A central aspect of Java's philosophy is that "names" matter.  A `Person` with properties `firstName` and `lastName` is clearer and safer than a tuple of `String` and `String`.  

<br>

### Resources

1.  https://openjdk.java.net/jeps/359    
2.  https://cr.openjdk.java.net/~briangoetz/amber/datum.html
3.  https://github.com/Vipin-Sharma/JDK14Examples, this repository have all code we discussed in this post.

<br>

### At the end

To learn the best java language features and get the best Java Jobs download my ebook [5 steps to Best Java Jobs](https://jfeatures.com/) for Free.

Follow me on twitter [@vipinbit](https://twitter.com/vipinbit) to get daily tips like this on Java Language Features.
